doc: document submitting changes to modules (#16081)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/modules.rst

including:

- Debugger integration
- Silicon vendor Hardware Abstraction Layers (HALs)
- Cryptography libraries
- File Systems
- Inter-Process Communication (IPC) libraries

The build system variable :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES` is a `CMake list`_ of
absolute paths to the directories containing Zephyr modules. These modules
contain :file:`CMakeLists.txt` and :file:`Kconfig` files describing how to
build and configure them, respectively. Module :file:`CMakeLists.txt` files are
added to the build using CMake's `add_subdirectory()`_ command, and the
:file:`Kconfig` files are included in the build's Kconfig menu tree.

If you have :ref:`west <west>` installed, you don't need to worry about how
this variable is defined unless you are adding a new module. The build system
knows how to use west to set :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES`. You can add additional
modules to this list by setting the :makevar:`ZEPHYR_EXTRA_MODULES` CMake
variable. This can be useful if you want to keep the list of modules found with
west and also add your own.

Finally, you can also specify the list of modules yourself in various ways, or
not use modules at all if your application doesn't need them.

> Topologies supported

Reviewer: These topologies etc belong in the west document, not here; zephyr modules are a build system source code organization artifact which is orthogonal to multirepo. Not all repositories in the west manifest are zephyr modules (like net-tools).

.. _modules:

Modules (External projects)
############################

Zephyr relies on the source code of several externally maintained projects in
order to avoid reinventing the wheel and to reuse as much well-established,
mature code as possible when it makes sense. In the context of Zephyr's build
system those are called *modules*. These modules must be integrated with the

> Zephyr build system, which is described in more detail in other sections on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Zephyr build system, as described in more detail in other sections on
```

this page.

> There are several categories of external projects that Zephyr depends on,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Zephyr depends on several categories of modules, including:
```

If west is installed and :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES` is not already set, the
build system finds all the modules in your :term:`west installation` and uses
those. It does this by running :ref:`west list <west-multi-repo-misc>` to get
the paths of all the projects in the installation, then filters the results to
just those projects which have the necessary module metadata files.

Each project in the ``west list`` output is tested like this:

- If the project contains a file named :file:`zephyr/module.yml`, then
  its contents should look like this:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     build:
       cmake: <cmake-directory>
       kconfig: <directory>/Kconfig

  The ``cmake: <cmake-directory>`` part specifies that
  :file:`<cmake-directory>` contains the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` to use. The
  ``kconfig: <directory>/Kconfig`` part specifies the Kconfig file to use.
  Neither is required: ``cmake`` defaults to ``zephyr``, and ``kconfig``
  defaults to ``zephyr/Kconfig``.

  Here is an example :file:`module.yml` file referring to
  :file:`CMakeLists.txt` and :file:`Kconfig` files in the root directory of the
  module:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     build:
       cmake: .
       kconfig: Kconfig

> - Otherwise (i.e. if the project has no :file:`zephyr/module.yml`), then the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Otherwise (i.e. if the project has no :file:`zephyr/module.yml`), the
```

   .. code-block:: cmake

      set(ZEPHYR_MODULES <path-to-module1> <path-to-module2> [...])
      include($ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE}/cmake/app/boilerplate.cmake NO_POLICY_SCOPE)

   If you choose this option, make sure to set the variable **before** including
   the boilerplate file, as shown above.

#. In a separate CMake script which is pre-loaded to populate the CMake cache,
   like this:

   .. code-block:: cmake

      # Put this in a file with a name like "zephyr-modules.cmake"
      set(ZEPHYR_MODULES <path-to-module1> <path-to-module2>
        CACHE STRING "pre-cached modules")

   You can tell the build system to use this file by adding ``-C
   zephyr-modules.cmake`` to your CMake command line.

Not Using Modules
=================

If you don't have west installed and don't specify :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES`
yourself, then no additional modules are added to the build. You will still be
able to build any applications that don't require code or Kconfig options
defined in an external repository.

.. _submitting_new_modules:

Submitting Changes to Modules
******************************

When submitting new or making changes to existing modules the main repository

> Zephyr needs a reference to the changes to be able to verify the changes. In the

Reviewer 2: lower case Z since this is a repo name, right?

main tree this is done using revisions. For code that is already merged and part

> of the tree we use the commit hash, a tag or a branch name. For pull requests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the tree we use the commit hash, a tag, or a branch name. For pull requests
```

however we require specifying the pull request number in the revision field to
allow building the Zephyr main tree with the changes submitted to the
module.
To avoid merging changes to master with pull request information, the pull
request should be marked as ``DNM`` (Do Not Merge) to make sure it is not merge
by mistake and to allow for the module to first be merged. Once the module is
merged, the revision will need to be changed either by the submitter or by the
maintainer to the commit hash of the module which reflects the changes.

Note that multiple and dependent changes to different modules can be submitted
using exactly the same process. In this case you will change multiple entries of
all modules that have a pull request against them.

> Submitting a new Module

Reviewer 2: Actually, case of headings isn't consistent in this document.  I'd recommend just using a leading capital letter and then lower-case words throughout.

========================

Requirements
-------------

Modules to be included in the default manifest of the Zephyr project need to
provide functionality or features endorsed and approved by the project technical
steering committee and should follow the project licencing and contribution
guidelines.

> A request for a new module should be initiated using an RFC issue in the

Reviewer: s/initiated/initialized/

created by the project team and initialized with basic information that would
allow submitting code to the module project following the project contribution
guidelines.

Process
-------

Follow the following steps to request a new module:

#. Use `GitHub issues`_ to open an issue with details about the module to be
   created
#. propose a name for the repository to be created under the Zephyr project
   organization on Github.
#. Maintainers from the Zephyr project will create the repository and initialize
   it. You will be added as a collaborator in the new repository.
#. Submit the module content (Code) to the new repository following the
   guidelines described :ref:`here <modules_using_west>`.
#. Submit a new entry into the :zephyr_file:`west.yml` with the following
   information:

   .. code-block:: console

        - name: <name of repository>
          path: <path to where the repository should be cloned>
          revision: <ref pointer to module pull request>

For example, to add *my_module* to the manifest:

.. code-block:: console

    - name: my_module
      path: modules/lib/my_module
      revision: pull/23/head

> Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request submitted to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request number submitted to the
```

*my_module* repository.

.. _changes_to_existing_module:

Changes to existing Modules
===========================

#. Submit the changes using a pull request to an existing repository following
   the :ref:`contribution guidelines <contribute_guidelines>`.
#. Submit a pull request changing the entry referencing the module into the
   :zephyr_file:`west.yml` of the main Zephyr tree with the following
   information:

   .. code-block:: console

        - name: <name of repository>
          path: <path to where the repository should be cloned>
          revision: <ref pointer to module pull request>

For example, to add *my_module* to the manifest:

.. code-block:: console

    - name: my_module
      path: modules/lib/my_module
      revision: pull/23/head

> Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request submitted to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request number submitted to the
```

.. _modules:

Modules (External projects)
############################

Zephyr relies on the source code of several externally maintained projects in
order to avoid reinventing the wheel and to reuse as much well-established,
mature code as possible when it makes sense. In the context of Zephyr's build
system those are called *modules*. These modules must be integrated with the
Zephyr build system, as described in more detail in other sections on
this page.

Zephyr depends on several categories of modules, including:

> including:

Reviewer 2: delete this line (extra "including")

- Cryptography libraries
- File Systems
- Inter-Process Communication (IPC) libraries

The build system variable :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES` is a `CMake list`_ of
absolute paths to the directories containing Zephyr modules. These modules
contain :file:`CMakeLists.txt` and :file:`Kconfig` files describing how to
build and configure them, respectively. Module :file:`CMakeLists.txt` files are
added to the build using CMake's `add_subdirectory()`_ command, and the
:file:`Kconfig` files are included in the build's Kconfig menu tree.

If you have :ref:`west <west>` installed, you don't need to worry about how
this variable is defined unless you are adding a new module. The build system
knows how to use west to set :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES`. You can add additional
modules to this list by setting the :makevar:`ZEPHYR_EXTRA_MODULES` CMake
variable. This can be useful if you want to keep the list of modules found with
west and also add your own.

See the section about :ref:`west-multi-repo` for more details.

Finally, you can also specify the list of modules yourself in various ways, or
not use modules at all if your application doesn't need them.

> Module Initialization

Reviewer 3: I would change this to `Module Inclusion`, since we are not really initializing here, but rather including them in the build

permanent commit hash. Once the module is merged, the revision will need to be
changed either by the submitter or by the maintainer to the commit hash of the
module which reflects the changes.

Note that multiple and dependent changes to different modules can be submitted
using exactly the same process. In this case you will change multiple entries of
all modules that have a pull request against them.

Submitting a new module
========================

Requirements
-------------

Modules to be included in the default manifest of the Zephyr project need to
provide functionality or features endorsed and approved by the project technical
steering committee and should follow the project licencing and
:ref:`contribute_guidelines`.

A request for a new module should be initialized using an RFC issue in the
Zephyr project issue tracking system with details about the module and how it
integrates into the project. If the request is approved, a new repository will
created by the project team and initialized with basic information that would
allow submitting code to the module project following the project contribution

> guidelines.

Reviewer 4: Will the modules be listed inside CODEOWNERS? If not, how will ownership be treated ?

Author: CODEOWNERS is per repo, for modules I do not think this will be needed, Github will figure this on its own. Each repo will have collaborators and members that will be responsible for reviews and changes.

Reviewer 4: ok, txs for feedback!

> All modules should be hosted in repositories under the Zephyr project. The

Reviewer 3: Technically I think those are called "users" in GitHub terminology, not "projects". Also I would mention the username explicitly "zephyrproject-rtos"

Author: organisation actually.

Reviewer 3: Indeed

> manifest should not point to repositories maintained under the Zephyr project.

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't it be something like `The manifest should not point to repositories `**not**` maintained under the Zephyr project` ? Else I don't understand how this could match with previous sentence.

   zephyr-modules.cmake`` to your CMake command line.

Not Using Modules
=================

If you don't have west installed and don't specify :makevar:`ZEPHYR_MODULES`
yourself, then no additional modules are added to the build. You will still be
able to build any applications that don't require code or Kconfig options
defined in an external repository.

.. _submitting_new_modules:

Submitting a new Module
***********************

Requirements
============

Modules to be included in the default manifest of the Zephyr project need to
provide functionality or features endorsed and approved by the project technical
steering committee and should follow the project licencing and contribution
guidelines.

A request for a new module should be initiated using an RFC issue in the
Zephyr project issue tracking system with details about the module and how it
integrates into the project. If the request is approved, a new repository is

> created and initiated with basic information that would allow submitting code to

Reviewer: Maybe "will be created by the project team"?

s/initiated/initialized/

the module project following the project contribution guidelines.

Process
=======

Follow the following steps to request a new module:

> #. Submit an issue with details about the module to be created

Reviewer: in the zephyr repository issue tracker (a link would be good too)

#. propose a name for the repository to be created under the Zephyr project

>    organization on Github.

Reviewer: nitpick: GitHub

Reviewer 2: also, uppercase P on propose

#. Maintainers from the Zephyr project will create the repository and initialize
   it. You will be added as a collaborator in the new repository.

> #. Submit the module content (Code) to the new repository following the

Reviewer: s/Code/code, etc./ (note lowercase)

   guidelines described :ref:`here <modules_using_west>`.

> #. Submit a new entry into the :zephyr_file:`west.yml` with the following

Reviewer: s/Submit a new entry into the/Add the project to/

   information:

   .. code-block:: console

        - name: <name of repository>
          path: <path to where the repository should be cloned>

>           revision: <ref pointer to module pull request>

Reviewer: They need to update this before merge with the final revision, right?

For example, to add *my_module* to the manifest:

.. code-block:: console

    - name: my_module
      path: modules/lib/my_module
      revision: pull/23/head

Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request submitted to the

> *my_module* repository.

Reviewer: I think it's worth noting here that requesting the pull head is for CI to be able to test it out. Then mention we'll merge the module code PR and then they need to update the west.yml PR with the final revision before we can merge that, making the module an official part of the project.

.. _changes_to_existing_module:

Changes to existing Modules
***************************

> #. Submit the changes using a pull-request to an existing repository following

Reviewer: pull request

   the :ref:`contribution guidelines <contribute_guidelines>`.

> #. Submit a pull-request changing the entry referencing the module into the

Reviewer: pull request

   :zephyr_file:`west.yml` of the main Zephyr tree with the following
   information:

   .. code-block:: console

        - name: <name of repository>
          path: <path to where the repository should be cloned>
          revision: <ref pointer to module pull request>

For example, to add *my_module* to the manifest:

.. code-block:: console

    - name: my_module
      path: modules/lib/my_module
      revision: pull/23/head

Where 23 in the example above indicated the pull request submitted to the

> *my_module* repository.

Reviewer: Same deal here, the additional post-merge update steps to the revision need documenting too.

> Reviewing and Merging Changes Related to Modules

Reviewer: Ah, I see you have it here; that's too late IMO. I think at least adding steps above with a `:ref:` to this section would make it more clear that it's part of the process for both adding new and modifying existing modules.

*************************************************

Specifying the pull request number in the revision field will allow building the Zephyr main tree with the changes submitted to the
module. The pull request to master will need to be marked as ``DNM`` (Do Not
Merge) to allow for the module to first be merged. Once the module is merged,

> the revision will need to be changed either by submitted or by the maintainer

Reviewer: submitter

Reviewer 5: +the + submitter or by -the-+a+ maintainer

> to the commit hash of the module which reflects the changes.

Reviewer 5: > commit hash 

Question: Is the intention that the zephyr manifest will always point to hashes and never to tags of modules?

Author: both will work, a tag is a commit after all. we do not create tags for each merged PR in the modules now.

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to start tagging the released versions of each module (i.e. tag the version of each module used for Zephyr v1.15.0, etc.) so it would be easy to see using plain `git log` in each module repository what to use. But that's for the next release manager, not regular contributors (@ioannisg, thoughts?)
